<html>
  
 <body>
   <h1>
   Globalization and risks to health
As borders disappear, people and goods are increasingly free to move, creating new challenges
to global health. These cannot be met by national governments alone but must be dealt with instead
by international organizations and agreements
Tikki Pang & G. Emmanuel Guindon

E
very year, the same ritual takes place
at changing locations in the Western
world. While the heads of the eight
leading industrialized nations meet at
their annual G8 summit to discuss the
global state of affairs, a wide variety of
organizations and protesters meet in

parallel to decry what they see as the neg-
ative effects of globalization. Notwith-
standing these protests, whether one sees

globalization as a tool to overcome poverty,
hunger and disease in the world or

whether one feels threatened by its conse-
quences, one thing is certain: globaliza-
tion is here to stay. Often narrowly

defined as the increasing integration of
the world’s economies, globalization is in

reality a powerful development that pre-
sents new challenges at the beginning of

this millennium.

One major problem is the increasing

internationalization of health risks. How-
ever defined, this term has many dimen-
sions, including economic, technological,

political, social, scientific and cultural
aspects. The links between globalization
and health are complex and globalization
is a multifaceted phenomenon that can

affect health in myriad ways. Its conse-
quences can be either direct, at the level

of whole populations, individuals and
healthcare delivery systems, or indirect,
through the economy and other factors,
such as education, sanitation and water
supply (Woodward et al, 2001). Given the
enormous complexity and breadth of the
issues, our article cannot hope to cover

the entire range of topics that link global-
ization to health. Instead, we focus on

those risks to health and health care that

are related to central aspects of the global-
ization process, namely trade, travel and

exchange of information.
Amajor factor for the liberalization of

international trade has been the mul-
tilateral trade negotiations during the

past 50 years, which culminated in
the establishment of the World Trade
Organization (WTO) (Bettcher et al, 2000).
Figure 1 illustrates the significant increases
in world trade since 1980. Although
increasing trade is certainly good for
economies, it also leads to a globalization of
health risks. Important examples of such

risks include tobacco, alcohol, global epi-
demics of non-communicable diseases and

trade in health services.
The World Health Organization (WHO)
estimates that the death toll from tobacco
abuse alone will reach 10 million a year
over the next two decades. Up to 70% of

these deaths, caused by lung cancer, cardio-
vascular diseases (CVDs), lung diseases,

diabetes and many other tobacco-related
ailments, will occur in developing countries
(Murray & Lopez, 1997). These countries are
at particular risk, as industrialized countries
increasingly ban cigarette advertisements
and tobacco companies intensively target

people in poorer nations as potential cus-
tomers. The high incidence of smoking

among children and adolescents, and the

disturbingly low age of initiation, raise addi-
tional concerns (Global Youth Tobacco

Survey Collaborative Group, 2002).
Alcohol consumption is another area
in which the globalization of an industry
has led to more health risks (Jernigan,
1997). However, unlike tobacco use, which
S11
science & society science & society

7,000,000
World merchandise exports
[million US $]
6,000,000
5,000,000
4,000,000
3,000,000
2,000,000
1,000,000

Years

0
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
Source: WTO 2003

World

Developed
economies

Developing
economies
Economies
in transition

Fig 1 | World merchandise exports by levels of economic development, 1980–2002

science & society

EMBO reports VOL 5 | SPECIAL ISSUE | 2004 ©2004 EUROPEAN MOLECULAR BIOLOGY ORGANIZATION
special issue

S12
substantially increases the risk of mortality
from an impressive array of diseases (Doll,
1998), the impact of alcohol consumption
on health is much more complex. There is a

strong relationship between alcohol con-
sumption and liver cirrhosis, some cancers,

and most causes of injuries and violence,
although minimal amounts of alcohol are
sufficient to reduce the risk of CVD
(Beaglehole & Yach, 2003).

The WHO has estimated that by the year
2020, non-communicable diseases, such as
cancers, diabetes, obesity and CVD, will
cause about two-thirds of the global disease
burden, up from 40% at present. This rapid
increase again illustrates the globalized risks
for conditions that are mainly caused by diet,
even in less developed countries that have
coexistent under-nutrition. There were 151
million cases of diabetes worldwide in 2001,
and this is estimated to increase by 46% to
221 million cases in 2010, with the steepest
growth in the developing world (Zimmet

et al, 2001). The same holds true for obesity
(Shell, 2001). Of course, not all of this is
globalization’s fault—these chronic or

‘lifestyle’ diseases are mainly caused by per-
sonal choice, that is, a sedentary lifestyle, the

use of tobacco and a fat- and sugar-rich diet.
Nevertheless, a key factor has been the
unprecedented increase in the global food

trade, and its domination by large trans-
national companies that have developed

global brand names and aggressive market-
ing strategies adapted to local situations

(Chopra et al, 2002). The spread of universal
brand names of popular beverages and fast

foods has been especially rapid in the devel-
oping world during the past two or three

decades and has contributed to the global
epidemic of obesity by replacing traditional
diets with fat- and calorie-rich foods. It is
revealing that only a short period after their
introduction on the Chinese market, 65%,

42% and 40% of consumers in China recog-
nized the brands Coca Cola, Pepsi and

Nestlé, respectively (Lang, 2001).
Globalization of trade is also manifested

in the implementation of the WTO’s agree-
ment on Trade Related Aspects of

Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), which
extends patent protection on new drugs for
a minimum period of 20 years. As a result of
high prices, TRIPS threatens to limit and

undermine access to new medicines, espe-
cially to poor populations living in the

developing world (Kamal & Bailey, 2003). In
this sense, the implementation of TRIPS can
be seen as exacerbating health risks. Trade
and movement of infected cattle and poultry

across national borders may also have con-
tributed to recent outbreaks of mad cow dis-
ease in the Northern hemisphere and avian

influenza in Asia.

The globalization of trade is particularly
relevant for health services that have become
a commodity that can be traded in distinct
ways. First, health services can be provided
across borders. Examples include a range of
telemedicine tools, such as tele-diagnostics

and tele-radiology as well as medical consul-
tation through traditional and electronic

channels. Second, patients can travel abroad

to receive health care or use certain facili-
ties—the UK government recently allowed

UK patients to seek treatment in the European
Economic Area (Lowson et al, 2002). Other
countries, including developing ones such as
Cuba and India, openly advertise to attract
foreign patients to their clinics and hospitals.
Third, health services themselves have
become an industry that attracts foreign

investments. Several transnational compa-
nies from developed and developing coun-
tries have already created commercial health

services through the purchase and establish-
ment of hospitals (Chanda, 2002). Fourth, the

international movement of health personnel
across borders has become a significant
component of the trade in health services and
has attracted considerable attention in the
scientific and lay press.
S
imilar to trade, globalization has had
large effects on international travel, with
serious consequences for global health.
The liberalization of the airline industry in
many countries has made air travel affordable
for more and more people around the world,
which has led to a dramatic increase in the
amount of global air travel. Sutherst (2004)
estimated that about one million people
travel internationally every day and a
similar number travel between developed

Fig 2 | Coronaviruses with their typical crown (corona)-like appearance under the electron microscope.
© (1975) Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA/Dr Fred Murphy
The spread of universal brand
names of popular beverages and
fast foods has ... contributed to
the global epidemic of obesity by
replacing traditional diets with
fat- and calorie-rich foods

TRIPS [WTO’s agreement on
Trade Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights]
threatens to limit and undermine
access to new medicines,
especially to poor populations
living in the developing world

science & society

©2004 EUROPEAN MOLECULAR BIOLOGY ORGANIZATION EMBO reports VOL 5 | SPECIAL ISSUE | 2004
special issue

S13

and developing countries each week.
Another recent report (Gossling, 2002) put
the number of global tourist arrivals per year
at 700 million. Far-reaching air travel, aided
by improvements in aircraft technology that
allow longer non-stop flights, facilitates the
spread of communicable diseases. It is
entirely possible that a person in the early
stages of an infectious disease could be
halfway around the world in 12–15 hours
and thus function as a vector for that disease,
aiding its spread, perhaps into vulnerable,

non-immune populations. The recent epi-
demic of severe acute respiratory syndrome

(SARS) is the best contemporary example of
the rapid spread of a hitherto unknown and
virulent viral pathogen through travel of
infected humans (Figs 2, 3 and 4). SARS was
first recognized in February 2003 in Vietnam
where cases of atypical pneumonia with an
unknown cause began to appear. By the first

week of May 2003, 30 countries on six conti-
nents had reported a total of more than 7,000

probable cases with more than 500 deaths
(WHO, 2003a).

Another example is the global spread
of antibiotic-resistant Pneumococcus that
was first identified in Spain in the early
1980s and rapidly jumped to South Africa
and the USA before spreading to all other
parts of the world (WHO, 2000). Each year,
approximately two million children die in
developing countries as a result of lower
respiratory infections, mostly pneumonia.
The exact origin of this Pneumococcus
strain is still unknown but is likely to come
from the Far East (McGee et al, 2001).
Perhaps the most profound changes that
have taken place during the past

10 years have come through the glob-
alization of ideas and information, facilitated

through the revolution in information tech-
nology. The internet, satellite television

broadcasting and high-speed data links
across the globe have dramatically
increased access to all kinds of information,
even in the most remote corners of the

world. Despite early concerns about a ‘digi-
tal divide’ that would further disadvantage

the poor, these fears have been overestimat-
ed. The reality is that this divide is narrowing

between rich and poor countries that have

increasing access to cell phone communi-
cation and the internet (The Economist,

2004). The success of the food and tobacco
industries’ aggressive marketing strategies

mentioned above have been closely linked
to this information revolution.
Although better access to information is
certainly a good thing, it has also created

fears that freely available scientific informa-
tion might be abused by terrorists (Beck,

2003). Giving basically everyone who is
interested access to the full sequences of
human pathogen genomes, and the ongoing
trend towards open access of published
research (Owens, 2003) and even ongoing
research activities for new drugs (Hubbard &
Love, 2003), poses a serious dilemma with
important implications for global health.

Should the full sequence of the anthrax bacil-
lus or smallpox virus and other virulent

pathogens be published if this data could be
used to develop biological weapons?
Another example is the development of an
improved virus to kill mice that has created
fears that the enhanced virus could be used
for bioterrorism (Finkel, 2001). Al-Qaeda and
the Japanese terrorist group Aum Shinrikyo
might have planned to use published
research data for nefarious purposes (Petro &
Relman, 2003).
There is another inherent danger that
comes with the vast flood of information
now available through the internet, namely

the reliability and accuracy of health infor-
mation from various web sites (Eysenbach

et al, 2002). Many such sites contain wrong,
misleading and even dangerous information
(Crocco et al, 2002), and the lay public are
often more confused than informed when
they search for health advice.
Without doubt, globalization poses
risks to global health, but it also

provides benefits. The extraordi-
nary improvements in information technol-
ogy have dramatically increased the speed

and ease of data flow, thereby facilitating the
sharing of information. Medical discoveries
made in one country can be made nearly
instantaneously available to patients in other
countries (Wassenaar, 2003). It has also sped
up the pace of discovery by linking
researchers across the globe to work on the
same problem, such as the response to SARS.
Global cooperation of scientists linked

through the internet resulted in the impres-
sively rapid identification of the SARS virus

and the development of a diagnostic test
(Gerberding, 2003). Similarly, the New
England Journal of Medicine used the internet
and electronic communication to review,
revise and rapidly publish vital articles on the
SARS epidemic (Drazen & Campion, 2003).

Index case
from
Guangdong

Hospital 2
Hong Kong
4 HCW
+2
Hospital 3
Hong Kong
3 HCW

Hospital 1
Hong Kong
99 HCW

Hospital 4
Hong Kong

4 other
Hong Kong
hospitals
28 HCW

Vietnam
37 HCW
+?

Bangkok
HCW

Canada
12 HCW
+4

Hotel M
Hong Kong

Ireland

USA

Singapore
34 HCW
+37
New York
Germany
HCW
+2
Source: WHO/CDC

A
H
J
B
C D
E
I
K
F
G

Fig 3 | SARS: international amplification and transmission by guests, indicated as A–K, at Hotel M, Hong
Kong, 21 February–26 March 2003. HCW, healthcare workers.

...a person in the early stages of
an infectious disease could be
halfway around the world in
12–15 hours and thus function as
a vector for that disease...

science & society

EMBO reports VOL 5 | SPECIAL ISSUE | 2004 ©2004 EUROPEAN MOLECULAR BIOLOGY ORGANIZATION
special issue

S14
And although many non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) decry the negative
effects of increasing globalization, they
have also clearly benefited from it to
improve healthcare delivery and health
policy in many developing countries. A
recent key contribution of the global NGO
movement lies with the adoption of the
Framework Convention on Tobacco
Control (FCTC). NGOs had an essential
and vital role at the local, national and
international levels in all development
phases of the FCTC (Mackay, 2003), and
their contribution continues as they
actively work with countries in the FCTC
ratification process.
Globalization has also brought about
improvements in research methodology,
and some argue that clinical research has
become more sophisticated as a result

(Wassenaar, 2003). Other benefits of glob-
alization include cross-border use of

health services that benefit patients and
provide much needed resources to national

health systems (Jain, 2003) and improved
regulatory practices (Wassenaar, 2003).
Finally, one should not underestimate the

power of knowledge as it empowers popu-
lations and individuals and, in turn, allows

them to hold to account their political and
professional leaders (Ellis, 2003).
As the major international agency
dealing with global public health
issues, the WHO—together with
other international organizations—has an
important role in mitigating the health risks
posed by globalization. Through the FCTC,
the WHO has tried to impose more stringent
control on tobacco use in its member states.

The policies recommend price and tax mea-
sures, protection from exposure to second-
hand smoke, and regulation and disclosure

of the contents of tobacco products.

Packaging and labelling, advertising, pro-
motion and sponsorship are also regulated,

as are tobacco dependence and cessation
measures, illicit trade, sales to and by

minors, and liability (Hammond & Assunta,
2003). In May 2003, the final draft of the
FCTC was adopted by the 56th World
Health Assembly. The treaty has been open
for signature since June 2003 and will enter
into force once it has been ratified by 40
parties. As of 1 July 2004, 167 countries and
the European Community have signed the
FCTC and 24 have ratified it, up from nine in
March—impressive progress in just four
months. The most recent public smoking
bans in places such as New York City,
Ireland and Norway are clearly further
important steps towards protecting public
health from the perils of tobacco smoke.
Another example of the WHO’s key role
in global public health are the International
Health Regulations (IHR; WHO, 2004).
These were used during the SARS epidemic

to issue emergency travel advisories for sev-
eral major cities in the world affected by the

disease to discourage and restrict travel and
thus contain the virus. These regulations
were drafted to ensure maximum security

The presentation of material on the maps contained herein does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization
concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or areas or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

Data Source: World Health Organization; production of original map: Public Health Mapping Team Communicable Diseases (CDS)

© World Health Organization, September 2003

Total number of cases: 8,422 (as of August 2003)
Cummulative number of
reported probable cases
1
2–10

11–100
101–1,000
>1,000

Fig 4 | SARS: cumulative number of reported probable cases as of 7 August 2003

science & society

©2004 EUROPEAN MOLECULAR BIOLOGY ORGANIZATION EMBO reports VOL 5 | SPECIAL ISSUE | 2004
special issue

S15

against the international spread of diseases
with minimum interference to world traffic.
One of the oldest international political
instruments, the IHR started as the
International Sanitary Regulations in 1951
to provide a set of rules to protect the world
from the spread of what were then referred
to as ‘quarantinable’ diseases; in 1969, this
became the IHR. It is now being revised
with the goal of providing a framework
within which the WHO and other agencies
can help countries to respond to future global
public health threats by directly linking IHR
to the global alert and response network
established by the WHO.

With regards to the epidemic of over-
nutrition as the main cause of many chronic,

non-communicable diseases, some have
suggested that the WHO should help to
develop a coordinated global strategy on
diet, physical activity and health (Chopra
et al, 2002). Such a strategy should include
the use of policy, education and trade
mechanisms to achieve its goal. To this end,
the WHO advocates a healthier lifestyle—a
recent joint WHO–FAO (Food and

Agriculture Organization) report recom-
mends that consumption of added sugars,

beyond those naturally present, should be
less than 10% of the daily caloric intake
(WHO, 2003b).

Various national and international
groups have also been concerned with the
quality and accuracy of health information
found on the internet. The WHO is leading
an initiative to establish a .health (‘dot
health’) domain to enhance the credibility

of information provided for public and per-
sonal health. The WHO proposed to restrict

the use of .health to content providers who
would voluntarily abide by established
quality and/or ethical standards. However,
in November 2000, the Internet Corporation
for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN)
rejected the WHO’s proposal because it
was concerned by the vagueness of the
WHO’s standards for restricting registrars.
Objections were also raised, notably by a
multinational pharmaceutical company, “as
to the appropriateness of according a degree

of authoritativeness over the implied accu-
racy of health-care-related information to a

single quasi-governmental organization”
(ICANN, 2000).
There have also been calls for a global
oversight system to regulate and approve
research on dangerous pathogens
(Steinbruner & Harris, 2003). Participating
governments would be required to establish
review bodies that regulate relevant
research in this area. Such an approach

must clearly involve the scientific commu-
nity and must strike a balance between

national security needs against the benefits
of open scientific communication for future
health improvement.
As pointed out above, globalization

will not go away. It is therefore impor-
tant to anticipate future challenges

for global health and to consider how to
react effectively. One major and increasing

problem is the movement of health profes-
sionals from developing countries to high-
income countries, which threatens the

sustainability of health systems in the poor
world. The Director General of the WHO,
Lee Jong-wook, clearly highlighted this
potential threat while addressing the 53rd
session of the WHO Regional Committee for
Africa: “Health systems depend most of all
on skilled and dedicated personnel, and
here we face big challenges, particularly in
this region which, on top of everything else,
suffers heavy losses to the brain drain” (Lee,
2003). The extent of the problem has been
highlighted previously (Pang et al, 2002) and
a recent survey from Lithuania, where 61%
of medical residents and 26% of physicians
surveyed said they intended to leave for the
EU or other countries, illustrates well the
potential magnitude of health professional
brain drain (Stankunas et al, 2004), not just
for African countries.

However, the migration of health person-
nel raises a complex ethical dilemma. On

the one hand, it appears unethical for devel-
oped countries, which often depend on

foreign-trained physicians to address short-
ages in rural areas, to attract health profes-
sionals from poorer countries. On the other

hand, it hardly seems ethical to prevent
skilled workers in search of a better life from
accepting better opportunities, financial or
professional (Scott et al, 2004). As borders
disappear, there is an urgent need to develop
strategies, at the national and international

level, that will minimize the harm and maxi-
mize the benefits of the movement of health

personnel. Equally urgent is the need for
more information about this problem. There
are surprisingly little data on the magnitude
of the movement of health professionals
between poor and rich countries, and few
studies have examined the impact of brain
drain on national health systems.

Foreign direct investment in the health

area, notably for the purchase and construc-
tion of medical facilities, also brings both

opportunities and concerns. As mentioned

previously, the presence of foreign commer-
cial healthcare providers and transnational

health services have the potential to benefit
both patients and national coffers. However,
one should not ignore the potential negative
impact of privatized health care. A recent
systematic review of private for-profit and
private not-for-profit dialysis facilities in the

USA found that haemodialysis care in not-
for-profit centres was associated with a

lower risk of mortality (Devereaux et al,

2002). More research to examine the poten-
tial impact of foreign commercial presence

and cross-border use of health services on
health is needed so that regulations can be
designed to maximize their benefits and
protect patients.
As mentioned previously, if patent
protection leads to prohibitively
priced drugs, it undermines access

to new medicines among the most vulnera-
ble populations. The effects of the TRIPS

agreement on pharmaceutical prices need
to be documented, and the design and

implementation of international agree-
ments need to consider the potential effects

on developing countries’ health systems
(Woodward et al, 2001). Similarly, the

Essential Drugs List, which guides the selec-
tion of drugs on the basis of public health

relevance, efficacy, safety and cost, needs
to remain an integral part of national drug
policies (Smith & Tickell, 2003).

There is sufficient evidence that global-
ization has resulted in higher tobacco con-
sumption, notably in poorer countries

(WHO, 2001) and higher alcohol use, partic-
ularly among younger individuals (Kuo

et al, 2003). It is therefore essential that

governments retain the ability within interna-
tional agreements to regulate so that they can

...the development of an
improved virus to kill mice...
has created fears that the
enhanced virus could be used for
bioterrorism

...freely available scientific
information might be at risk of
being abused by terrorists

science & society

EMBO reports VOL 5 | SPECIAL ISSUE | 2004 ©2004 EUROPEAN MOLECULAR BIOLOGY ORGANIZATION
special issue

S16
protect public health, especially the ability to
restrict, and ban if necessary, advertising and
lobbying activities. Finally, the ongoing
review of the IHR process must transform
these regulations into an effective tool that

will allow countries to strengthen global dis-
ease surveillance and to respond efficiently

to international public health emergencies.

The current models of international rela-
tions, mobility and movement of goods and

people are responsible for the globalization
of health risks. These developments clearly
lead to an increase in health risks either
directly or indirectly, particularly in the
developing world where the benefits of
globalization are often offset by its adverse
effects. More insidiously, the threat of

misuse of globalized information for bio-
terrorism purposes is becoming a serious

concern for many governments. Inter-
national organizations can have an impor-
tant role in minimizing such risks through

regulations, policy recommendations, advo-
cacy and promoting dialogue among inter-
ested parties. In addition, to reap the bene-
fits of globalization, we need novel

approaches to international cooperation

that place national self-interest in the con-
text of global mutual interest and, in this

way, promote international cooperation and
goodwill (Frenk & Gomez-Dantes, 2002).
</h1>
  
  </body>

</html>
